# STR analysis using ExpansionHunter Denovo
*This step applies ExpansionHunter Denovo (EDH) to aligned RNA-seq BAM files to investigate candidate short tandem repeat (STR) regions. Due to limitations of RNA-seq data for STR detection, additional preprocessing of the aligned BAM files using GATK SplitNCigarReads was also evaluated.*

## Requirements
ExpansionHunter Denovo should be installed according to the official documentation: <br>
https://github.com/Illumina/ExpansionHunterDenovo/blob/master/documentation/02_Installation.md

Additional softwear: 
- GATK
- samtools
  
A reference genome in FASTA format is required. 
Aligned BAM files are required as input. 


## 1. Go to the analysis directory
Go to the EHdn directory for the dataset:
```
cd /your_directory/sample_download/your_dataset/EHdn
```
<br>

## 2. Generate STR profiles
Generate an STR profile for each sample:
```
ExpansionHunterDenovo profile \
 --reads sample.bam \
 --reference reference_genome.fa \
 --output-prefix output/sample_name \
 --min-anchor-mapq 50 \
 --max-irr-mapq 4
```
Repeat this step for all samples. <br>

## 3. Create a manifest file
Create a manifest describing all case and control samples according to https://github.com/Illumina/ExpansionHunterDenovo/blob/master/documentation/06_Merging_profiles.md
Comparisons where the control is both the eutopic endometrium from a healthy individual (healthy control) or an individual with endometriosis (internal control). 
Repeat this for all comparisons
```
Cntrl vs Eut
Cntrl vs Ect
Cntrl vs Ectovary
Eut vs Ect
Eut vs Ectovary
```

## 4. Case control analysis
Perform case-control analysis according to the instructions:
https://github.com/Illumina/ExpansionHunterDenovo/blob/master/documentation/07_Case_control_analysis.md

Repeat for all manifests. 

## 5. 

# Run nf-core/rnaseq 
*This step performs read alignment and transcript quantification using the nf-core/rnaseq pipeline. Due to the computational requirements, the analysis should be run on a high-performance computing (HPC) system or equivalent bioinformatic sever.*



## 1. Create a sample sheet
Create a sample sheet:
```
nano samplesheet.csv
```
<br>

Structure the file as follows:
```
sample,fastq_1,fastq_2,strandedness
sample_name, your_sample_directroy/sample_name_R1.fastq.gz, your_sample_directroy/sample_name_R2.fastq.gz, reverse
sample_name, your_sample_directroy/sample_name_R1.fastq.gz, your_sample_directroy/sample_name_R2.fastq.gz, reverse
....
```
<br>

For single-end sequensing, leave the `fastq_2` column empty:
```
sample,fastq_1,fastq_2,strandedness
sample_name, your_sample_directroy/sample_name_R1.fastq.gz,, reverse
sample_name, your_sample_directroy/sample_name_R1.fastq.gz,, reverse
...
```
<br>

Save the file with ```Ctrl + O```, press ```Enter```, and exit with ```Ctrl+X```.

## 2. Run the pipeline
Run the pipeline according to the nf-core/rnaseq documentation. <br>

The following workflow was used: <br>
`STAR`-> `Salmon`<br>

The analysis generates aligned BAM files and transcript quantification files that can be used for downstream analysis. 
